---
layout: post
published: true
title:  "Every service is an island"
summary: >
  We had an incident yesterday.

  It wasn't that bad as incidents go, but it got me really worried — it's
  something that has the potential to become *much* worse as we move towards a
  distributed, multi-service world.

---

_This article was cross-posted from the [Deliveroo dev
blog](http://deliveroo.engineering/2017/03/27/every-service-is-an-island.html)._

_Editor's note_: the issues described here have since been fixed.

<figure>
![Crashing wave](/public/every-service-is-an-island/wave.jpg)
<figcaption>
You do not want this to happen when you're on call.
<br/><small>
Source: [Oshiokuri Hato Tsusen no Zu](https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Oshiokuri_Hato_Tsusen_no_Zu.jpg) from Wikimedia commons, public domain.
</small>
</figcaption>
</figure>



## What happened: hot path service chaining

Our APIs are calling services when responding to HTTP requests — synchronously.

It doesn't really matter which, but a few concrete examples probably help: we
call into `identity-service` when checking sessions for rider app API calls, and
`restaurant-targets` when displaying restaurant listings to consumers (to
predict when we'll be able to deliver delicious food).

Yesterday, those services became partly unreachable; their apparent response
time increased and many requests to those services timed out. This cascaded into
more and more of our web workers being blocked waiting on those; then unrelated
requests timing out; and ultimately a degraded experience for all users.

We were lucky: the underlying issue resolved itself within a couple of minutes,
so most people barely noticed anything.

The frustrating thing is that the services themselves worked perfectly fine
during the outage. This was just a transient network issue.


## Why this is bad: runtime service coupling

Because this is an architecture design problem.

The Internet is a harsh place, and **services will fail**. Where it gets worse
is that things will fail unpredictably, and uncleanly — they'll slow down
instead of failing, for instance.

This is why if we want to make our user experience (for customers, riders, etc)
reliable, it doesn't matter much how reliable we make `identity-service`,
`restaurant-targets`, or other services: if they're called synchronously when
serving users, things will fail, and cascade into general failure.

In other words: when services are tightly coupled (by making synchronous calls
to each other), **every service is a single point of failure**. Which is another
way of saying things are still monolithic, from an operation perspective if not
from a development perspective.

<figure>
![Service on the hot path](/public/every-service-is-an-island/hot-path.svg)
</figure>

In the `identity-service` example, almost any call to the Rider API results in
a call to the identity service, to check whether a given session token is valid.
We informally call this a "hot path" because any service involved is "hot" —
they're all required for things to work.



## Fixing our architecture: bulkheading and event driven services

[Circuit-breakers](https://martinfowler.com/bliki/CircuitBreaker.html) and
[bulkheads](http://stackoverflow.com/a/30685644/161487) will likely be
mentioned. They help somewhat, but they will not fix the main issue: we're
talking to other services on the “hot
path” of serving users, and things *will* fail unpredictably.

<figure>
![Bulkheaded services](/public/every-service-is-an-island/bulkhead.svg)
</figure>

Part of the reason is that tech operations rely on fairly consistent performance
and usage of resources: scaling up/down is not instant, for instance; amongst
other well-known
[constraints](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fallacies_of_distributed_computing).
If calls to `identity-service` instantly start taking 4x the time, its circuit
breaker will not blow its fuse, but the rider API will still go down before
autoscaling kicks in.

This applies whatever the bulkhead is: rate limiter, circuit-breaker,
read-through cache. All three wil help reliability but not guarantee fault
isolation, because they support only _known_ failure modes.


The long-term solution is a design style I've been promoting for a while with
[RESN](http://dec0de.me/2014/09/resn-routemaster) and
[`routemaster`](https://github.com/deliveroo/routemaster). The general idea is
that every service can form its idea of the state of the world, by passively
listening for notifications from other services; act upon this representation
without assuming the state is fully up-to-date; and notify other
services/clients in turn as appropriate.

<figure>
![Event-driven services](/public/every-service-is-an-island/evented.svg)
</figure>

Here, the `identity-service` emits a bus event whenever a session is created.
The `rider-api` listens to those events to populate its local cache of valid
sessions. Whenever a request hits the API, only the local cache is checked.

With this approach, bulkheading becomes unnecessary for read operations
(although it still has its place for write operations). All reads are
essentially become service-local. This is visually obvious in the second half of
the diagram above: on the _get orders_ path, no other service than the
`rider-api` is involved.

## Going further

I've only touched the surface of the reliability benefits and design constraints
of event-driven distributed systems here. The approach above can be generalized
for _write_ operations too, in some cases where reliability is paramount.

Yes, this is difficult. It means a very asynchronous design. It means procedural
HTTP transactions often aren't possible and you'll need callbacks, web hooks,
async notifications of some sort in some cases. It means you may need revisiting
user interfaces.  But it's possible and avoids the kind of reliability issues
we're seeing at our scale.

If you want highly reliable distributed services, at the cost of some mild
consistency headaches:

Make every service an island.



